🚨Do not merge until Oct 18 launch -  dbt Semantic Layer docs (#2148)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/integrate/dbt-semantic-layer.md

---
title: "dbt Semantic Layer"
id: dbt-semantic-layer
description: "Introducing the dbt Semantic Layer"
sidebar_label: "dbt Semantic Layer"
---

:::info 📌

The dbt Semantic Layer is currently available for public preview. With the dbt Semantic Layer, you'll be able to centrally define business metrics, remove code duplication and inconsistency, create self-service in downstream tools, and more! 

> For more info on public preview and plan availability, check out the [public preview](/docs/integrate/dbt-semantic-layer#public-preview) and [product architecture](/docs/integrate/dbt-semantic-layer#product-architecture) section.

Reviewer: *Public Preview

   * Developer accounts will be able to query the Proxy Server using SQL, but will not be able to browse pre-populated dbt metrics in external tools, which requires access to the Metadata API.
- Have both your production and development environments running dbt version 1.2 (latest) or higher
- Use Snowflake data platfrom 
- Install the [metrics package](https://hub.getdbt.com/dbt-labs/metrics/latest/) version 0.3.2 or higher in your dbt project
- Set up the [Metadata API](/docs/dbt-cloud/dbt-cloud-api/metadata/metadata-overview) in the integrated tool to import metric definitions
- Recommended - Review the [dbt metrics page](/docs/building-a-dbt-project/metrics) and [Getting started with the dbt Semantic Layer blog](/docs.getdbt.com/blog/getting-started-with-the-dbt-semantic-layer)

:::caution Considerations

Some important considerations to know about during the public preview:

- Support for Snowflake data platform only (_additional data platforms coming soon_)
- Support for the deployment environment only (_development experience coming soon_)
- Do not use environment variables for the job/environment (_coming soon_)

:::

## Public preview

> The dbt Semantic Layer is currently available for public preview, which means:

Reviewer: See my comments on this in the Quickstart section

---
title: "dbt Semantic Layer"
id: dbt-semantic-layer
description: "Introducing the dbt Semantic Layer"
sidebar_label: "dbt Semantic Layer"
---

:::info 📌

> The dbt Semantic Layer is currently available for public preview! With the dbt Semantic Layer, you'll be able to centrally define business metrics, remove code duplication and inconsistency, create self-service in downstream tools, and more! 

Reviewer 2: It might have more impact to choose just one of the sentences to end with an exclamation point.  Whichever point you think is more important to stress.

For more info on public preview and plan availability, check out the [public preview](/docs/integrate/dbt-semantic-layer#public-preview) and [product architecture](/docs/integrate/dbt-semantic-layer#product-architecture) section.
    
:::

> The dbt Semantic Layer allows data teams to centrally define essential business metrics like `revenue`, `customer`, and `churn` in the modeling layer (your dbt project), for consistent self-service within downstream data tools like BI and metadata management solutions. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The dbt Semantic Layer allows data teams to centrally define essential business metrics like `revenue`, `customer`, and `churn` in the modeling layer (your dbt project) for consistent self-service within downstream data tools like BI and metadata management solutions.
```

The result? You have less duplicative coding for data teams and more consistency for data consumers. The dbt Semantic Layer has four main parts:

- Define your metrics in version-controlled dbt project code
- Import your metric definitions via the [Metadata API](/docs/dbt-cloud/dbt-cloud-api/metadata/metadata-querying)
- Query your metric data via the dbt Proxy Server
- Explore and analyze dbt metrics in downstream tools

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/semantic-layer/sl_architecture.png" title="dbt Semantic Layer architecture" />

> **What makes the dbt Semantic Layer different?**

Reviewer 2: Should we use an ### header for this rather than bold type?

> The dbt Semantic Layer removes code duplication and inconsistency when it comes to your business metrics. By moving metric definitions out of the BI layer and into the modeling layer, data teams can feel confident that different business units are working from the same data definitions, regardless of their tool of choice. If a metric definition changes in dbt, it’s refreshed everywhere it’s invoked and creates consistency across all applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The dbt Semantic Layer removes code duplication and inconsistency regarding your business metrics. By moving metric definitions out of the BI layer and into the modeling layer, data teams can feel confident that different business units are working from the same data definitions, regardless of their tool of choice. If a metric definition changes in dbt, it’s refreshed everywhere it’s invoked and creates consistency across all applications.
```

## Prerequisites
To use the dbt Semantic Layer, you’ll need to meet the following:

> - Have a multi-tenant [dbt Cloud](https://cloud.getdbt.com/) Teams or Enterprise account. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Have a multi-tenant [dbt Cloud](https://cloud.getdbt.com/) Teams or Enterprise account
```

   * Developer accounts will be able to query the Proxy Server using SQL, but will not be able to browse pre-populated dbt metrics in external tools, which requires access to the Metadata API.
- Have both your production and development environments running dbt version 1.2 (latest) or higher
- Use Snowflake data platfrom 
- Install the metrics package version 0.3.2 or higher in your dbt project
- Set up the [Metadata API](/docs/dbt-cloud/dbt-cloud-api/metadata/metadata-overview) in the integrated tool to import metric definitions

> - Recommended - Review the dbt metrics page and Getting started with the dbt Semantic Layer blog

Reviewer 2: It might be beneficial to link to these pages again so readers don't have to scroll and find.

### Considerations

> Here are some important considerations to know about during public preview:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some important considerations to know about during the public preview:
```

- Support for Snowflake data platform only (_additional data platforms coming soon_)
- Support for the deployment environment only (_development experience coming soon_)
- Do not use environment variables for the job/environment (_coming soon_)

## Public preview

The dbt Semantic Layer is currently available for public preview, which means:

&mdash; **Who?** The dbt Semantic Layer is open to all dbt Cloud tiers (Developer, Team, and Enterprise) during public preview. Developer accounts will be able to query the Proxy Server using SQL, but will not be able to browse dbt metrics in external tools, which requires access to the Metadata API. 

&mdash; **What?** Public preview provides early access to new features, is supported and production ready, but not priced yet. Pricing for the dbt Semantic Layer will be introduced alongside the General Available (GA) release. There may also still be additions or modifications to product behavior. 

> &mdash; **When?** Public preview will end once the dbt Semantic Layer is available for GA. After GA, the dbt Semantic Layer will only be available to dbt Cloud **Team** and **Enterprise** plans.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
&mdash; **When?** Public preview will end once the dbt Semantic Layer is generally available. After GA, the dbt Semantic Layer will only be available to dbt Cloud **Team** and **Enterprise** plans.
```

&mdash; **Where?** Public preview is enabled at the account level so you don’t need to worry about enabling it per user.

&mdash; **Why?** Public preview is designed to test the functionality and collect feedback from the community on performance, usability, and documentation. 

## Product architecture 

> The dbt Semantic Layer product architecture includes four primary components, and you can review that and its plan availability in more detail below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The dbt Semantic Layer product architecture includes four primary components:
```

| Components | Information | Developer plans | Team plans | Enterprise plans | License |
| --- | --- | :---: | :---: | :---: | --- |
| **dbt metrics** | Allows you to define metrics in dbt Core. | ✅ | ✅ |  ✅  | Open source, Core |
| **dbt Server**| HTTP server that is able to quickly compile metric queries per environment using dbt project code. | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | BSL |

> | **SQL Proxy** | Reverse-proxy that accepts dbt-SQL (SQL + Jinja like query models and metrics, use macros), compiles the query into pure SQL, and executes the query against the data platform. | ✅ <br></br>_* Available during public preview only_ | ✅ | ✅ | Proprietary, Cloud (Team & Enterprise) |

Reviewer 2: "Available during public preview only". What happens when the public preview is over?

| **Metadata API**  | Accesses metric definitions primarily via integrations and is the source of truth for objects defined in dbt projects (like models, macros, sources, metrics). The Metadata API is updated at the end of every dbt Cloud run. | ❌ | ✅ | ✅ | Proprietary, Cloud (Team & Enterprise |

dbt Semantic Layer integrations will:

- Leverage the Metadata API to fetch a list of objects and their attributes, like metrics
- Generate a dbt-SQL statement
- Then query the SQL proxy to evaluate the results of this statement

## Manage metrics

:::info 📌

New to dbt or metrics? Check out our [Getting Started guide](/guides/getting-started) to build your first dbt project! If you'd like to define your first metrics, try our [Jaffle Shop](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle_shop_metrics) example project.

:::

If you're not sure whether to define a metric in dbt or not, ask yourself the following: 

> *Is this something our teams consistently need to report on?*  

An important business metric should be:

- Well-defined (the definition is agreed upon throughout the entire organization)
- Time-bound (able to be compared across time)

> A great example of this is **revenue** - it can be aggregated on multiple levels (weekly, monthly, etc) and is key for the broader business to understand:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A great example of this is **revenue** &mdash it can be aggregated on multiple levels (weekly, monthly, etc) and is key for the broader business to understand:
```

✅ `Monthly Recurring Revenue` or `Weekly Active Users` or `Average Order Value`
❌ `1-off experimental metric`

**dbt metrics package**

The dbt Semantic Layer supports the calculation of metrics by using the [dbt-metrics package](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt_metrics). This package supports the following primary aggregate metrics:

- Count
- Count distinct
- Average
- Max
- Min
- Sum

Additionally, the dbt-metrics package supports secondary metric calculations including:

- Period over Period changes differences and ratios
- Period to date average, sum, min, and max
- Rolling average, sum, min, and max

The secondary metric calculations use a built-in calendar, which you can use to define time boundaries for weeks, months, and quarters. The default calendar is applicable for many businesses, and users may supply their own calendars if they use non-standard quarters or other time constructs for reporting.

### Design and define metrics

> You can define your metrics in `.yml` files nested under a metrics key. To start designing or defining your own metrics in your dbt project, review the following documents to get started:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can define your metrics in `.yml` files nested under a metrics key. To start designing or defining your own metrics in your dbt project, review the following documents:
```
